Hello, David. Welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Amazing to have you here.
I'm glad to be here.
Talk Python has been part of my story up to this point.
Has it? Okay. Well,
you are about to write the next chapter in the story.
So that's pretty excellent.
I have a sense of what's coming.
We planned out what we're going to talk about and that sort of thing.
And I'm really excited about this topic.
So it's going to be a good one.
Honestly, I think one of the real powers of the Python community
and the reason the language has such staying power
is there's such a diversity of use cases, technology standpoints, right?
Like I build software for this group or I build these types of apps
and it's not just, you know, like Ruby on Rails,
which, you know, it's been very popular and stuff,
but it's for websites, right?
You know what I mean?
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, web development has dominated my use of it, but my entry into it,
which I suppose I'll mention in a moment, was through all those little tools.
Was it? Okay. Yeah. Well, let's hear it. Who are you, David Flood? Introduce yourself real quick
and tell us about how you got into it.
Yep.
So my background is in music and the humanities.
I mean, in 2019, I didn't know what Python was
or the name of any programming language.
And I've been doing textual criticism,
which is, you know, there's lots of criticisms in the academy.
This is the one where if you have lots and lots of versions
of the same text you are comparing them to to work out what the initial text was and like how
it changed over time okay give it give us an example okay so uh one of the famous examples
hope i can remember it off the top of my head um is from shakespeare we're all familiar with the
line to be or not to be that is the question that is the question uh well there's a there's a variant
of it. There's a variant of it. One of the early copies written by Shakespeare himself has...
Somebody's going to be able to type into the chat exactly what it is. They'll know this anecdote,
but it's something more like to be or not to be. I, that's the question. And so which one is the
original one? Why did he change it? That's kind of one example. I work mainly in the New Testament,
which is especially complicated because no other corpus from ancient history has as many copies of the same text as that corpus does.
So it's quite complicated.
And our techniques have grown because of that and perhaps become more advanced than other fields.
I mean, that many variations over that huge span of time over different groups with different, maybe not intentions, but certainly colored by different worldviews and philosophies and so on.
And yeah, I see the travel.
No, yeah.
And they were people of the book.
So copying it is something that happened a lot.
And they copied the monks, like the medieval monks copied everything.
They copied, you know, our Greek classics.
So that's what I was interested in.
And because of the wealth of data that we have, computer tools are more and more important in that field.
So when I started my PhD in 2019, I knew that I wanted to use some of these cutting edge tools.
Some of them may be surprising.
For example, we've been using phylogenetic software.
This is software that evolutionary biologists are using or computational biologists are using to track, for example, how COVID strains like mutate over time.
Oh, interesting.
What they're comparing are the DNA letters.
And so you have the sequence of letters and you're comparing how those change over time.
Well, you can swap in textual variants for DNA letters, and now we can track how texts change over time and group them into families, things like that.
It's like a time series, but of words or letters or something.
Yeah, how interesting.
Yeah, I mean, yeah.
There's lots of important algorithms for comparing sequences of things.
And so if we can just swap in Greek, you know, Greek words and Greek text instead, then we can maybe apply it to textual criticism.
So I was pretty interested in those things.
That wasn't actually the method that brought me into it, but something like that kind of computer intensive tools.
What I learned is that these tools were not like they weren't actually available to me.
They weren't desktop applications.
And for the most part, they weren't public web applications.
They were software libraries.
I see. So something on PyPI or something like that, right?
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Or Java. And I needed to glue them together. So the long story short on
that is during the first year of my PhD, I was picking up Python, watching YouTube videos while
I was doing the dishes. And then the pandemic hit while I was living in Edinburgh in Scotland,
probably not far from will mccougan um and uh so the pandemic gave me the excuse to spend even a
few more hours um you know each day um picking up these new these new technical skills uh but so i
did it i was able to use these advanced tools in my in my work but what was really important to me
was sharing like making that available to my colleagues as i had to i had to move from writing
these like bad top to bottom Python scripts into things that could be reused by other people.
And that led me into the web because the web is where that's how I can share with anybody.
It's the easiest way. And it's really wild how much the web is kind of the last bastion of
app freedom. It's so bizarre because, you know, I've many times told the stories of the insane
battles of just getting our apps that just playback video of content that's already on the web
into the app store. I mean, weeks of fighting about the weirdest, most nonsensical things with
both Google and Apple. But we also now have the Mac platform and the Windows platform very
aggressively looking for digital code certificates and all sorts of signing and other kinds of,
You can't even just send somebody an executable anymore.
It won't run. It's crazy.
It's down to like, okay, put it on the web, I guess.
- That's right. I played the game of distributing desktop apps.
That's how I did it.
That's how I initially distributed things.
And at this point, I just require people to install Python
and then install my desktop app from PyPI
because it's too hard otherwise for me.
I mean, I could pay for the code signing from Apple and do all of that,
but it's just too much work for the time that I have.
Yeah, I'm about to do another round of it.
I'm working on an app, and my developer account is still active,
so we might have a fresh round of fun.
Hopefully it goes through this time.
Anyway, I do think it's such a challenge.
And are you leveraging?
I don't know if the timing was right.
Maybe this was too early.
But these days, are you leveraging things like uvx to run,
or are you just pip install this thing and then run it?
Yeah, I haven't updated the readme in a while,
so I think it just asks for pip.
But certainly, if somebody asked me today,
I would say, "Yeah, just install this with uv."
Yeah, yeah.
Because then they don't even need Python.
Exactly.
If they get it,
and that's a really,
it is another barrier reduced
in distributing these applications.
If you can get uv installed on a machine,
then you don't even have to say install just the way you run it is uvx my thing
and it's all transparent to you right which is beautiful so what was it like yeah so what was
it like coming from what sounds like a not super screen focus super techie aspect and having to
dive into this world and someday you're probably like how is it that i'm publishing stuff to pypi
what has happened to me yeah uh well yeah i i remember when i when i first signed up for github
because you know whatever youtube tutorial i was working through at the time
um you know said that i need that that i needed to do that um you know i i think it all started
making a lot of sense um i didn't have any technical background but the uh the world
the world kind of open source software it it just it kind of made sense it felt like it fit really
well into my into my academic um you know circle yeah i think a lot of the attitudes are similar
i agree i think they are actually and i think that's i think that's a pretty neat thing
yeah very cool all right well let's talk about what you're doing with digital humanities you're
actually at a really interesting project or organization, I guess that does many projects,
right? Yeah, yeah. So fast, fast forwarding, I did, I finished my PhD in the humanities.
Yeah, sorry, I cut you off there, didn't I? That's fine. I had so much fun writing like these tools
and then just get it solving the distribution problem to share them with other scholars.
That was so fun that I was open to this kind of opportunity where now I'm doing this full time.
And so, yes, I so I'm on the we call it affectionately Darth, which is digital arts and humanities at Harvard.
Awesome. There has to be a lot of Star Wars memes and references, I'm sure.
If you can pull up a 404, I think there will be a Darth Vader.
Oh, seriously, I'm here for it.
Yes, page not found. I find your lack of nav disturbing.
you know what i think that is beautiful and i really i really think that people should embrace
the 404 the fun 404 page you know more right there should really be something going on that
like makes it you know something hasn't worked out but you can just you can make people laugh
but I appreciate that
I've heard people push back against it
like if you're on
your medical website
and you're maybe about to get bad news
and then you get like a picture of a kitten
Dr. Kitten doesn't know where your results went
I get that that's not funny
but I mean most things are not that serious
mostly
okay so what kind of things
does Darth do
You've described this as kind of a web or tech agency within Harvard.
Maybe more within the digital art group.
Yeah, it is very much.
So, you know, Harvard has a gigantic IT group.
I don't know how many hundreds of people work, but more than 500 people in IT.
We are a small team, and we operate very much like a small agency.
So usually what happens is a faculty member has a funded research project that's going to last for an amount of time.
And then we consult with them to build it.
And most of the time, I kind of think of these as I kind of have these different categories of these kinds of projects that I think of.
Mm-hmm.
I lost in my notes what I called them, but they are there.
You have like a one is like a virtual research environment.
So the focus is this is this is a platform that we're building for the research to be done.
Like the reason the research should be done in like a web app would be because you have access to visualization, to Postgres,
to pandas so you we can we can kind of build up this platform to do the actual research on
and some of the data entry all right so like a full-on research application yeah and i guess
you can also kind of see your work through the different stages of research projects and academic
research and so on and we'll get to maybe end of life in a sense uh further down down in the
conversation. But so this would be, we have a grant or we just work here and we're going to work on
some form of research. What do you give them? Right? Like, I think that's a super interesting
challenge because one of the real common answers would be Jupyter, JupyterLab, Marimo, whatever.
But that's still pretty code heavy for people who are possibly philosophers or something, you know,
Oh, exactly. That's why in digital humanities, I won't even, maybe I won't even attempt to define it in any narrow sense, because I'll get in trouble with somebody.
But you have two groups that are interfacing with each other. And one is digital humanities as a field, like as a subfield, all of its own. And these are people who have humanities domain, like knowledge, and technical skills.
and they're bringing them together.
And in a lot of cases, the audience for that kind of work
is other people working in the digital humanities.
But far more common, and this is what we work with,
is people who have humanities domain expertise
and they want to publish or do research or share
with other people who have that same humanities domain expertise
and they are now interested in adding a technical component to it.
How can we supercharge what they have?
Maybe just take a moment and speak to,
maybe I don't know if this venue will actually speak directly to anybody who I was imagining here,
but people who work with folks,
what would you tell somebody who works with a group who have some technical skill,
who could create some of these things that we're going to talk about,
but the people who they agree for don't necessarily think they need it or know that they need it.
Like, you know, I've gone often on rants about how programming is a superpower, not a replacement for your job, right?
Yeah, that's a problem for a lot of people, especially because you might use some new computer tools to supercharge your research.
But the article that you publish or the research output of that, the audience, they may not be interested in hearing about that at all.
And so for most people who are working in this space, the tools, you have to use them in such a way that you can talk about the research output without talking about the tool.
And we have other venues to talk about the tools themselves, like the Journal for Open Source Software.
And you can kind of get some of it out there.
But that's the significant challenge is convincing people that it could be useful and then convincing
the audience that they should be interested in the methods behind how some of the new research
comes out.
Also, I think I'm a big believer that presenting stuff in the right order is really, really
important.
If you present your research and it's beautiful and powerful, and oh, look, we've also, by
the way, covered 100 times more data than any prior research.
Surprise.
I wonder how I did that.
And then people are like, this is amazing.
Then after you kind of hook them with the inspiration and what's possible,
then you're like, let me tell you about the tool.
Don't say that's a cool tool, right?
This is not just like geekery, like programmer, you know,
a Charlie Brown speak, wah, wah, wah, wah, wah.
You know, it's like, no, I'm listening.
Tell me now.
Yeah, exactly.
I mean, one of the things I think that really opens people's eyes
is a really powerful search interface.
You have all of this research data.
Just put it behind Elasticsearch with some really good filtering on it.
And all of a sudden you have fast, rapid access to the data in a way you never had before.
Like you were never scrolling through the Excel spreadsheets and finding exactly what you wanted, like you were with this new search interface.
And that by itself is like so simple.
We're so used to that in web development that like everything needs to have a fantastic search now.
But so many people have their data locked behind, you know, a terrible search interface.
Yeah. Yeah. Just a few things to sort of expose that. So this, give us a sense of what these data
exploration web apps might look like. These are probably kind of mostly stuck to the inside,
kind of internal to the research lab research team groups and so on. These are probably not
that public facing, right? Almost everything we work on does end up having a public facing
component. So maybe the research itself is done locked behind a user login that's just for the
researchers. But then they expose that research to the public, usually with a good search interface
and different pages for exploring their data and visualizations and things like that. So
yeah, everything we do ends up becoming a production public web app in the end.
- Yeah, awesome.
And then another one of your categories you put in
was virtual research environments,
like data entry, publishing, authoring, collaboration.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, so a good example of this maybe
is one of the projects that,
well, actually the best example of it
is the project I worked on during my PhD.
It's called Apatosaurus.
short story behind the name is that it sounds like apparatus in textual
criticism when you are when you are displaying and visualizing variant
readings to a to a base text that like that that form of visualizing it is a
critical apparatus a critical apparatus is a pretty boring website name but a
patasaurus dinosaurs might make textual criticism sound fun yeah I do love
dinosaurs. No, that's really cool. So this comes out as a web app. And I know you also have some,
you talked about some desktop apps as well. Yeah, yeah, that's right. So yeah, so there's
people upload their collation to this, and then they can visualize it. And
like there's a public component of this as well. But really the back end is editing a collation,
adding notes to all of the different readings and stuff.
So I could show what the back end looks like,
but we can also move on.
Let's move on, just because most people will not tell you.
But just give us a sense of what do you create for people
so that they're like, yeah, I can use this app.
Give us a sense of some of the features, I guess,
what I'm getting to yeah so another another good example is we have what we
have project at Darth at Harvard called mapping color in history and this is a
collaboration with a lab this lab brings in pieces of artwork and they do like
spectral analysis on the pigments so they can identify like what was used to
make a particular color of this red or what was made to make this color of blue.
And then the idea is tracking how did people make those pigments over time,
over time, and specifically in Asian art.
Is this the Dharmra of Puna?
No, this is mapping color in history.
I don't think it's up here.
Sorry about that.
somewhere. That's all right. I'll find it. Keep talking. Okay. So, so the front end is great,
you know, the, like the public end, this is, people can, can explore by pigments and then
see the images that, that contain those pigments. Now in the back end, what the research,
researchers will be able to do is correlate exactly which point of a painting the analysis was done
that. So they have like this deep zoom image viewer where they'll zoom in and
they'll select the point where that was taken from. And so, you know, how else
would you do that other than a digital interface to indicate on an image of a
painting where that spectral analysis was performed?
Sounds almost like astronomy in a weird way.
Oh yeah.
We zoomed into here and we took a different spectrum of the painting and
we realized that it's actually identical to this, something crazy like that, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Nice.
That's right, yeah, so it's essentially a pigments database.
Yeah, wild.
So the third category of these digital humanities projects that you put down was
like data extraction, transformation.
In data science, they often say,
80% of the work is the data wrangling,
which is like cleaning, organization,
just getting it so you could possibly
start asking questions about it.
I'm sure you all do a lot of that.
- Absolutely.
So often the very beginning of a project
might be an Excel sheet or several spreadsheets.
And the first task is to ingest these into a proper database.
Not so much MongoDB for us.
It's going into Postgres or Django Shop.
So it's going into Postgres.
And yeah, no, that is probably the number one challenge of the early stage
is figuring out what the right data model is,
what the right relationships are to model the data.
Doing that work is advantageous to everybody because, you know, it helps both the researchers who brought the data to think about it in a more organized way.
I mean, they've been trying to do that and they have the spreadsheets.
But now we're modeling out the data so that we can add it to database tables and then to use later.
So that works out well for everybody.
And yeah, absolutely cleaning the data, getting dates,
working with fuzzy dates, being able to parse July of 2020
or summer of 2020 and handling kind of all of those cases
so that we do get dates in the end.
One of the crazy stories from data parsing history
is one of the--
I can't remember exactly what it was.
We talked about biology tools or genetics tools earlier.
One of the groups that names genes
had to change the name of a gene
because it kept getting parsed by Excel into a date.
- I remember that.
I remember that. - So crazy.
- Yes.
- So like these are the weird edge cases
I'm sure you run into.
Like it's not even supposed to be a date.
Why is this a date?
I don't know why is it a date?
Help me out here.
The code keeps crashing.
Like pandas parsed it as a date and it's not or whatever.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
So yeah, usually lots of test suites around that ingest process until we've got it.
Now, once we've got it in, usually the research is ongoing and then we're able to provide them
now a new cleaned interface to, to do the additional data entry as the project is going.
And that's usually a win-win for everybody.
Sure.
And so this sort of ETL ingestion side of everything is it's like, don't worry.
Darth has got it for you. And then we'll provide you like a
database connection to start working or do you give them the
tools and then they kind of iterate on them? And how much?
How much is this you and how much is this you providing like
CLI tools and stuff or notebooks over to people?
Our the I'd say most of the people that we're working with
are aware of the technical tools, but they don't want a
database connection. So we are giving them, we're doing the ingest and then building a platform
where they can begin interacting with their data. Yeah, I'm sure they don't want one.
Maybe you give them an app though, right, with like Elasticsearch and other things that they can...
No, absolutely. Yeah, that's what we do. Yeah, okay.
Yeah, we give them a web platform to begin exploring, to begin publishing.
So I was thinking that you said you're a Django shop, which is cool.
It sounds, though, to me like describing what you're doing, just imagining how this is.
You're probably creating these projects often.
How often does one of these projects actually last?
Or how many of them do you iterate?
I'm trying to get a sense.
Do you work on stuff for a year or is it like every two weeks we're on a new project?
It's why I think of us as like an agency because we get to work on greenfield projects fairly often, like you're imagining, which would not be the case normally at a big university IT department.
So, you know, maybe two or three projects a year, two or three big ones a year.
And then we have to put to bed a few a year as well because these things, they're funded with grant money.
and then the grant money runs out, and it's time.
And then we have to figure out, what do we do with it now?
We don't want to lose the data and this way of presenting it.
But we can't keep paying for Elasticsearch.
Yeah, of course.
Certainly, we're going to dive into that.
But let's save that for the end.
It seems like that's the arc of the story of these things.
But I certainly think it's something that you don't think about that much, right?
Like you said, it was only $100 a month for this, and we got a big grant.
There's a bunch of, no big deal.
But like when the grant's out,
who's on the hook for a hundred dollars a month
and making sure it survives upgrades
and all that kind of business.
No, that's right.
Yeah.
So my original question when I started on this path
was thinking like, do you,
how do you get started on these?
Do you have like a big framework
or a cookie cutter sort of thing or something?
Like this is how we do it
because it plugs into all this other automation
and tools we built for the last 10 projects.
You know, that's kind of a unique position.
A lot of companies build one website for themselves and that's their app or they're an agency that goes across so much variation they can't do that kind of stuff, right?
That's right.
That's a good question.
We have things that we reuse.
Some of them are open source, different, you know, like search components and things that we maintain that we'll use across projects.
And we have tried to do the cookie cutter Django project.
The truth is each project is different enough.
Yeah.
Really, we like to evaluate it from first principles as we're evaluating it and thinking, what is the best technology to use?
Yeah, so we don't have a cookie cutter.
We don't have a kind of a meta framework for bootstrapping them because they're sufficiently different from each other.
I find that too.
The idea of how we could just grab this cookie cutter or copier.
Are you familiar with copier?
People out there might be familiar with that.
It's a little bit like cookie cutter with the bonus that you can update it later
if you change your mind about something,
like actually change this project to use Postgres rather than SQLite or something,
which is pretty cool.
But every time that I do, every time I try to work with one of those projects,
even ones that I've created for myself, I'm not hating on anyone.
I'm like, oh, it's like 75% awesome and 25% I just got to take this stuff out.
You know, I'll just do it from scratch.
It's not how hard is this?
I'll just create a few folders and put a few things in there,
and I'll copy the PyProject.tom, like the one thing that's like,
how do I do this again?
I'll just copy that, and we're good to go.
Yeah, I mean, that's what I find.
That's what I find.
I find it seems like a really brilliant idea, but in practice,
it hasn't saved us time yet.
No, I mean, maybe it's a case study.
Like, okay, let's see what they're doing for this one.
Oh, that is interesting how they're integrating
this other thing maybe, but as a true foundation,
I find it in theory awesome.
In practice, I just end up not doing it for various reasons.
Don't know why.
I'm going to save this for later.
Because the question I'm about to ask you
is going to send us just down a rat hole.
So instead, before we go down the rat hole, maybe we could, not that one, maybe we could
talk about, I mean, you talked about something, but let's maybe just feature some of the projects
that are maybe more well-known that you guys have done.
Sure.
Yeah, good.
So yeah, one of them is called the amendments project.
And this is, I didn't know this until I started working on this project.
that there have been thousands of, I think it's at least 22,000 proposed amendments
to the United States Constitution that never went anywhere.
And so kind of the goal of this project is to show that there have been lots of attempts
to amend the Constitution, but actually the Constitution is frozen.
I mean, it's not actually amendable anymore, at least not in the politics of any time recently.
yeah yeah it's so this is a database i cannot imagine a situation where the u.s constitution
gets admitted it has to be unanimous across all the states right is that right if i can't remember
but it's been a long time i remember off the top of my head it has to be unanimous but it certainly
has to be it's got to be lines yeah it's got to be pretty darn close if it's not it all
Alstair in. Yeah, it's like, you know, time travel, or the speed of your travels be light,
could be theoretically possible, probably not going to happen.
No, it's hard to see. It's hard to see. Yeah. So this is from a historian,
historian at Harvard. Interesting. Okay. So, so it's a database of all of and the full text
from all of these amendments. And, you know, it's, it's from the public's point of view,
It's a Postgres full text vector search interface for finding and filtering through on all of the different amendments that have been proposed.
Awesome.
Okay.
Let's see.
I love it.
Yeah, this is a nice looking site.
We work with a designer.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah. Of course, like an agency would, right?
Yep. Yep.
Nice. So we'll get a really pretty rich search interface and then off you go.
I have no idea even what I would search for.
Yeah. Well, you can always search for something religious,
something abortion related. There's going to be lots of things there.
I thought all those also like guns, but like, I don't want to go down.
I'm not sure I even want to go down that route.
Awesome. This looks super useful.
Maybe someday we'll have a functional government again.
We'll see.
Let's change it.
Or maybe we'll go down in its folklore.
Like, look, it used to work.
All right.
So, yeah.
So another really great project, at least from a content point of view, that's interesting, the research that it's doing, is the Finn Folklore Database.
So in Celtic storytelling, you know, moms have been telling stories to daughters and people have been telling stories for a very long time, hundreds or a thousand years.
Finn McCommel who is a hero a hero from Irish mythology some of it some of it
based in you know historical events but it goes back it goes back so far so there
are there's many hundreds or thousands of of these stories that have been spread
and versions of these stories that have that have been told and so some of them
are audio recordings where somebody like some research researcher has has gone out to an island
off the coast of scotland and recorded somebody telling you know their version of the hero of finn
and his band of you know his band of heroes you know they defend scotland and ireland from from
invaders and attackers uh very exciting uh stories and stuff and a team of a team of characters
So there's audio recordings and then there's documents,
like written documents that contain these.
And so this is a database of kind of all of those all in one place with,
on the public side, a nice search interface for discovering them,
you know, either using the map view or searching.
Yeah, that's cool.
I got my map view for some random thing I searched about here.
Amazing.
Yeah, but this is pretty interesting, all these different tellings and stuff.
Oh, and yeah, one of the big challenges with this project is that it's fully internationalized.
So it's available in English.
Everything is available in English, Scottish Gaelic, and Irish Gaelic.
But that extends into the database.
So usually people have multiple names recorded for them.
And so, yeah, you may have one person with any number of names in different languages,
sometimes more than one Scottish name, that kind of thing.
And so the data model on this one is quite messy, but sensible.
But yeah, it's quite a lot of different kinds of data to wrangle.
And then with all of the translations for each thing.
Yeah, that's wild.
It's not just, we need the user interface of this thing to translate about.
That's way more, right?
Right. Yeah. Yeah. It is that. It is that. And then it is also, yes, all the items in the database
have a translation or can.
Okay. Yeah. I can see how that makes a lot of sense. You want to work in the native language
of the people who did that part of the folklore or whatever, right?
Yeah. Well, and people are still speaking those languages. So people who would use this
to, you know, like somebody may have heard a story from their mom or dad
and now would like to find other versions of that story.
And they live in a part of Scotland where they speak Scottish Gaelic as their first language.
Right, right. Very cool.
They can still access the site.
Yeah. And then that mapping color history one, that's another one of the public ones that you
said is pretty major.
Yeah, that's right. Yeah. So yeah, that's a pigments database. You can search by either
English color names like blue and find all of these Asian paintings that have blue or a particular kind
of pigment of how they made the blue. Yeah, nice. So what's the open source story? You're creating
all these apps, maybe some of these frameworks, there's got to be some tools. Is there a big
desire or already an effort to have a lot of these things open source or is it too niche or is it just
like this is the advantage of harvard has is other universities don't get this uh no it's it's
something we talk about quite a bit um usually these things start usually they start closed source
um during development and then we and then we work with the faculty and we talk about um
how we can take you know like the repo for the for the web app how we can take that um public
And so we've done that for a number of projects.
Not all of them are.
But the ideal is that they all make their way into the open,
and especially when they become archived.
Sure.
Yeah, that's a good way to help them live on.
And they might even go into GitHub's Arctic Vault, which is crazy.
I don't know if people know about that out there,
but GitHub has quite a while ago started taking copies of all of the repos and putting them,
backing them up and storing them in the Arctic vault.
It's kind of cool.
I really, really, really hope we never need that, but it's kind of neat.
Yeah, me too.
Usually universities have their own archival system,
so any important research data is usually part of that system as well.
I see.
Okay.
Yeah.
obviously right like i'm i can't remember where it was it was somewhere i think it was south korea
or taiwan where like seven years of government data got lost or something like that it was really
really bad recently there was a fire and i think they had backups but maybe just into the building
you know like we'll put that out we'll back it up to the hard drive over here
Not good.
No.
You definitely want this stuff to survive.
I mean, academia has this history of, like,
tomes that have survived the past
and really, really long-lived information, right?
Besides the Library of Alexandria or something like that, maybe.
That's what we want.
We want it to, yeah, we want it to last.
Absolutely.
So maybe that's a good time to sort of talk about the trailing end.
I think there's a lot of interesting things going on here.
Just like you've run out of money, not because you actually run out of money.
The grant is done, and you've either spent or given back or whatever
with the remaining little bits of money.
It's always a weird balance with research.
It's like, oh, we got $3,000 left on this research grant.
What are we going to do with it?
It's not like, well, we're going to give it back.
We just didn't need it.
It's like, we're going to find a way to like fund a student to do a little more work or
whatever.
But eventually the grant is over.
Then you've got some expensive app access to a big database because it needs a big search
or a lot of compute or something.
That's right.
Everything during like, I mean, anything, anything that's a, that's a Django app.
We deploy to AWS using containers, which isn't the cheapest way to host anything.
But that's for the most part the Harvard way.
And it is robust and is reliable.
And we don't have a DevOps person on call on the weekend to rescue one of these people.
apps so having having them reliable is good okay so it's so it's on AWS and
paying you know paying for the containers paying for that elastic search cluster
the art RDS Postgres database okay well even if somebody wants to start paying
for that out-of-pocket all of those little services they add up they add up
to enough that we need to do something when the project hits end of life and so
So our gold standard that we've developed so far is asking, can this become a static website? Can we bake this out into all HTML files and acknowledge that there will be some trade-offs? We will trade off some searching. It's not going to have Elasticsearch. It doesn't mean that it won't have any search, though. So we'll trade out Elasticsearch, and it'll be very difficult to add new data.
But that's okay because it's being archived. So can we get it into a static site? And that's challenging depending on how you've set it up. So we now have projects where we set them up from the beginning to be archivable like this. And one of them is called Water Stories. And it was a companion to an art installation at the Radcliffe Institute on the Harvard campus.
And so this was this live site during the duration of the art installation where people could come in and add stories that they had about water onto an iPad.
And then those went up to our database.
We built that with something called Django Bakery, which if you opt in and you use all of their class-based views the way that they're meant to be used,
then you can bake this out into static files when you're done.
Very low effort.
That was perfect.
That is such a cool idea. And mad props to them for ASCII art logos. Come on now. I feel like that should be in the view source if it's not. But this is such a cool idea because you can just take a working site. You guys are at Django Shop, so a lot of your sites are written in Django and you just go, make it static, right? More or less?
Yes. And what's really great about it is if they wanted to make a change, and they have,
they have asked since we, since we made it static, they've asked for a couple of changes.
So locally, I just Docker compose up this whole application, make the change in the Django admin
and rebake the site.
Yeah, that's cool.
It can still be updated.
Something, if you've never tried this, like something like, hey, can we just add one more
menu item? And you're like, no, no, no, we're not adding the menu item because you know what that
That means we're changing 7,300 pages because they all bake in the whole HTML, right?
Exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
But if that's in my Django database, in my SQLite file, then no problem at all.
Because then I just rebake it.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I think this is super neat.
There's also Frozen Flask, if I could get rid of all the ads.
I do not need a Yeti thing, whatever that is.
The glass, not the mythical thing.
But Frozen Flask, which does a similar thing for Flask apps,
if you're a Flask person, probably would work with Quart.
Don't know for sure, but probably.
So that's a pretty interesting idea as well.
Throw that in there.
But also, what else?
Also, you talked about search, right?
That can be such a problem.
And I'm a huge fan of your recommendation here with PageFind.
Tell us about PageFind.
So this has been, I think it's been a bit of a game changer in how
functional one of these archived sites can remain. So we're actually in the process of that amendments
website that searches across 22,000 full texts of amendments. We are in the process of sunsetting
that and that will become a static site. And that's for that search. We already have an internal demo
that that proves that we can replace that Postgres full search with PageFind. You lose vector search.
Yeah. You kind of got to get really true keyword matching.
Yeah. Yeah, that's right. But you still get filtering. I mean, and really faceting and filtering
is when it comes to discovery of things, I mean, I find that's really what's useful. So filtering
these amendments by state or by the Congress that was active at the time or by the person who
who co-wrote it um all of those are totally great in page find and the uh the keyword search is just
fine in page find uh one of the things i really like about it is that it it takes your index
and it chops it up into lots of little files that can just fly across the network so it's a very fast
search um it's it's not a huge network load even if your index is initially very large and it
It essentially cuts it up somewhat alphabetically.
So if your search starts with T, or I should say a better word for audio,
if it starts with W, then it will load up the index for words that start with W
and fly that over the network instead of the whole thing.
So it's pretty slick, and it has a great Python API.
So to do the proof of concept for the amendments search,
I just took a database dump and then manually indexed with a Python script into PageFind.
Wait, there's a Python API for PageFind?
Yeah.
So the way PageFind works, I should have said that, is the way most people will use it is by normally PageFind consumes HTML.
So you give it access to your dist folder.
Oh, okay.
And then it crawls through all of your HTML files.
And you can do great things like adding little HTML tags that are just for PageFind that give it the filtering ability or that you want to sort by something.
And so that's great.
Or you can just call PageFind from Python or from TypeScript and just build that index manually.
Well, thanks a lot, David.
I have another thing I've got to go research.
This is awesome.
I'm a huge fan of PageFind, as I said.
on my personal website, mkennedy.codes, is just a pure stat.
It starts in Markdown and ends up in HTML.
But if you add page find in, you get a super rich,
if you want to just know, you want to talk about,
like what was about Docker, it shows you really nice results,
pulling out the different parts of the page and sections that talk about it,
like the headers and then what is said.
and it even does like sub word, you know,
like if you just type doc, it finds all the words that match that.
And what I really like about it is a couple of things is it's instant.
It basically is like nearly instant.
If you type a few things, it gets way faster because it's pulling down.
And if you go and look in the network console here
and you type something,
you can see that it's actually pulling in these little tiny fragments,
which this one's coming off disk cache in three milliseconds, right?
But it breaks your index into a bunch of very small page find fragments
that I think it starts with anything that starts with the word DO.
These are all the prebuilt results and stuff like that, right?
That's right. That's right.
Yeah, that's super cool.
Yeah.
One of our open source projects that we maintain is a Vue.js component library for page find.
so that we can style it and reuse it across different projects.
Oh, that's awesome.
I love it.
Yeah, I think this really unlocks it.
And when you go to so many sites, like their documentation
or just their web app, and the search is so bad.
You type something, and it's like thinking, spinning, spinning,
spinning, spinning.
And then five seconds later, it gives you kind of janky results.
And if you just throw a page find in there,
you can't type fast enough to outrun the results.
You know what I mean?
No, that's right.
Yeah.
Too many static site search solutions,
they use like a JSON blob that you have to pull down
and then iterate through.
You know what's worse, and I see this a lot,
would be if you go to google.com, and then you would say,
effectively, site, colon, whatever,
and then you search Docker.
They basically pull that.
They just say, search this, and you just
get Google results for your site.
And obviously, Google's fine, but it's just--
No, I find that unusable, really.
I do, too.
It really-- you're like, ah, jeez.
But now I'm super excited to realize
I can do that from my dynamic content as well.
So with the Python integration.
OK.
Nice.
What about something truly static?
Have you looked at Hugo and some of the other type of things?
Sure.
So when I see you've even got the tab up for the SUMEB project,
which is--
that's essentially a database of many, many specimens taken
from the SUMEB mine.
OK.
Looks beautiful.
Oh, it is.
Yeah.
Yeah, it is.
So if you click on Minerals database,
you open up that search interface
and that's powered by PageFind.
- Oh, this is?
- Yes.
I forget what I was...
- I see.
You've even like hooked into,
I was thinking just like pure static, like Hugo, like...
- Oh yes, yes, yes.
So this is an astro site.
So for this website, we have this as an astro site
so that we have a little bit,
Because with Astro, they make it so easy to pull in Vue components.
I see.
So our page find is a custom Vue.js component library.
With Astro, you can use React components.
You can use Vue components.
But what it does is it's just a static site generator.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
So a little bit more designable than Hugo or something.
Here's your markdown file.
Good luck with that.
Yeah, I love Hugo, though.
Yeah, I use Hugo for different personal sites here and there.
And it's just so fast and easy to get up and running.
But it's great.
I do too.
That's what my website's written in, is in Hugo.
But if I'm integrating with anything else,
I used to kind of split it up.
Like this part's Hugo and this part's a Python app.
And it's pretty easy to get something
that will take a bunch of Markdown files
and just turn them into HTML and just put a page template
around that.
So I've kind of stepped away from mixing and matching that
as much as I used to.
So now if I've got a static section of a dynamic site.
But that has nothing to do with the archival side of things,
right?
Because the idea is that the thing that I'm describing
is gone on purpose.
That's right.
OK.
So you've got some--
we've got Django Bakery.
I threw out Frozen Flask, and I'm sure there's a ton more that neither of us are aware of at the moment.
So Django Bakery was really good for that purpose, and we're keeping our eyes open for projects that it's a good fit for.
But that was a pretty simple website.
It needed a dynamic backend, but it was quite straightforward.
And for Django Bakery, you have to opt into inheriting from their class-based views.
I see.
So you've got to think ahead of it.
Yeah, absolutely.
Hard to add retroactively, probably impossible.
Now our other websites, like the fin example
and the mapping color example, those are APIs.
That's a Django API, Django REST framework for one,
GraphQL for the other.
One has a view front end, one has a React front end.
Okay, well Django Bankery just isn't gonna work very well
for like serializing JSON.
It's like, awesome, here's your unrendered JavaScript
front-end code and it's just gonna look empty or something.
- Yeah, so it is a good reason to consider using
like vanilla Django templates when possible,
like for that reason, but those were inherited
from the vendors, those two sites,
and we've made a lot of progress on those.
So, you know, what to do in that,
Like in that situation, Django Bakery isn't an option.
And those projects are not end of life yet.
So we have some time, but we're, so what we're doing is strategizing.
Okay, how will we rescue them?
How will we keep them alive once somebody needs to stop paying for hosting?
And we have ideas.
We have, I think there's clever, interesting things out there.
We'll have to keep looking into it.
There are some pretty interesting ideas and I know that you had been thinking about them.
What if instead of having a back-end that ran in a container,
you could just have WebAssembly,
but still have it go,
just a local loopback type of thing?
Yeah, I'm really interested in this one because it enables essentially
the full functionality of the live site to exist as what is just a static site.
So because of Pyodide and projects like PyScript, we can run Python in the browser.
And we can run SQLite in the browser.
And now we can even run Postgres in the browser with PG Lite.
So we can run all those things in the browser, then couldn't we run, couldn't we have Django
hosted right in the browser?
And you can.
You can.
So there's a proof of concept that proves it's possible called Django WebAssembly.
And if you load up this, if you load this up, it'll let you log in to the Django admin
and you're not logging into anybody's backend.
logging into your own browser where this is running in a service worker.
Awesome.
Look at that.
Oh, hold on.
I told you where the password was.
Very secure.
Matt?
Password.
Well, it can be entirely insecure because, yeah, it's running right in your own browser.
Yeah, that's awesome.
And here we are, Django admin.
Incredible.
Yeah, so I'm pretty interested in this.
You've got to convert an RDS Postgres database into either SQLite or something like PGLite.
But I think that's all doable.
So I think it's an exciting possibility.
Yeah, for sure.
I do think, so maybe you have a rich query system that you're powering by your database
that's really heavy.
Exactly.
And it's got a bunch of data that's like, here's all of our working data that you might ask
questions about.
Maybe you just convert that to PageFind to help you find the pieces.
and just keep the operational data
and maybe like even a SQLite with like the Django ORM,
you can just switch the connection, keep talking to it.
I mean, there's possibilities to just get something not too terrible
that's not the same, but not that far off.
Yeah, exactly.
And then it goes on GitHub pages and it can live hopefully forever.
I mean, it feels like GitHub will last forever,
but it'll last longer than funding will anyways.
It's definitely going to last longer than just something that we can't pay for anymore.
I don't know how long GitHub is going to be around for, I think a while, but you never know.
It seems like stuff is going to last forever.
Then it gets changed.
We had subversion.
Now it's completely gone, right?
Just 20 years, 15 years later.
But still, I think 100% there.
- Yeah, but if something ever happened,
somebody just needs to copy that folder of HTML,
CSS and JavaScript files and dump it into an S3 bucket
or somewhere else and then it can continue living there.
So it's a good option.
- It's a great option.
It's a really, really good option.
I mean, I guess one of the long-term concerns might be
what if the WebAssembly standard changes so much
it's not supported anymore but you could probably bite wise convert it if you had to you know like
somebody would probably be able to create one yeah that would that would be unfortunate so
i suppose if that happens i mean if that happens yeah we're um booting up one of these projects
projects is like booting up an emulator for some old dos game right right well i mean i guess
let's think about this for a second somebody got oh gosh what was the chain this is the whole um
yavascript the pycon talk where got like firefox compiled into
wet not wasm into asm js or something like that so it was run like chrome was running firefox
which was running I think Doom which was also Asm.js. If we can do that we could get something
that would run that would read old WebAssembly into new WebAssembly if it really mattered to the world.
Absolutely. Yeah. Especially if it's in a public repo that people who care about the data can
can rescue it somehow. Yeah. What about like a virtual machine? You know, I agree. Yeah,
I'm gonna save me some, take a snapshot of Ubuntu LTS,
some version and just, what are we gonna do?
- Everything we do is Dockerized.
Everything is in a container.
So in the worst case scenario,
we could give somebody the image
and they could run it if they have Docker.
I think that's a nice peace of mind to know that
no matter what, something will be able to run this container.
And even in, I don't know if you've used GitHub,
What is it called? Codespaces.
- Yeah.
- I've, I've, I archived one project.
It was kind of dramatic and all,
and sudden that it needed to be archived.
So without much time to do anything.
And it was a Ruby on Rails project
and I'm not a Rails developer,
but I was able to get it archived in a way that anybody could
with one command, go to the repo on GitHub
and boot it up in Codespaces and then have it live.
running from their code space.
And so that works too.
Very cool. I think as WebAssembly grows,
there'll be more possibilities for these types of things.
Yeah, amazing. I'm pretty excited
about PageFind having a Python API.
I didn't realize that.
So I'm going to be doing something with that for sure.
Let me ask you one more thing
forward, I kind of let you wrap up with some final thoughts here. What about AI?
Oh, that's a good question. So AI, I mean, there's like, in my story, there's like one
interesting part of AI, which is that I got started and self-learned everything I needed
to about software development to begin doing this right before ChatGPT really came on and was able
to do real programming yeah you're like four years of legit programming before right so i think i
mean so i was thinking i was thinking and i was thinking about how i got into it i thought what
if i was four years later starting my phd and wanting to do these tools um i would have been
able to accomplish what i needed to for my research without acquiring the technical skills i know and
I don't know that's a good thing. I'm not sure if that's a good or bad thing. It could be both.
I would have thought it was a good thing. I would have thought it's a good thing. But in my hands now, like a software engineer, AI is more powerful in my hands now than it would have been then.
Even the same model, same everything.
for me. Yeah, I can make it work for me in a way that I couldn't have been able to then. So I'm
thankful for that. But it's something I think of, you know, I don't want to say it's a necessarily
a bad thing. But it definitely marks a difference, a difference in time between other people who are
maybe wanting to get into digital humanities, their humanities researchers, they want to add
some digital tools. You know, I think this will kind of this will probably knock people off of
the more technical path.
I think it will too.
And I think that that might be a negative.
When you were telling me your story originally,
I was thinking kind of like how neat is it that you didn't sign up for
and the people you were working with probably didn't intend to sign you up
for learning true software development.
But look at this cool and interesting job that you now have
that you never would have imagined.
I'm sure when you signed up for your PhD,
you're like, you know what I'm going to do when I get my PhD?
I'm going to go X, Y, like, I'm going to join the Darth program.
Like, no, probably not. Right. But here you are.
And I think that's actually a really interesting knock on effect for a lot of
researchers and people in grad schools.
They're kind of put into this programming adjacent type of thing.
You know, and a lot of folks sort of, actually, that's pretty interesting.
I'm going to kind of lean into that. And I think AI might knock,
not like you said, knock people off that path to some degree.
Yeah, definitely. So that's just one part of the AI story. The other one is how we use it. It's great for data extraction, pulling data out of different, to make these search interfaces more powerful, to extract different data from them. That's just one example where it's been handy.
we're looking for ways that it can really empower faculty.
You know, we're still very much in the exploration phase
of like how we can use it and provide it to faculty
as a like digital humanities tool.
- Sure, I was thinking pretty much
when I asked the question of it,
it's just like two parts, like one, how does it,
are you guys using it to help take project?
Well, that would have been a month.
No, actually it's three days.
You know what I mean?
that and then if people are asking you know a professor comes along and says and we want our
own custom ai thing or we're using harvard's internal one that we're allowed to use
but we won't be able to use it once the grant runs out you know what i mean
yeah yeah i think um one one good example of this type of thing is that um what we're starting to
to get is faculty who are vibe coding.
And now we're going to teach them.
We're going to teach them how to do it.
Yeah.
Instead of--
It is a skill.
Yeah.
It's absolutely a skill.
No, it is.
It is.
Instead of copy and pasting from ChatGPT into VS Code,
having them learn Copilot, maybe even having them download
cursor.
Download some real dedicated tools
to get this done to make them more productive.
So yeah, educating about how to do it is one thing.
You asked if we're using it.
We have access to a co-pilot and that's great.
I can't say that we've shipped anything in three days
instead of a month yet, but one anecdote is that
right now I'm doing some really interesting
Processing of music of music audio files and somebody asked to have a beatboxer if I could chop that file up
So that all of the individual sounds that the beatboxer makes are identified in a file and so okay
So I'm using some music library. So a Python library library called Librosa
There's some complicated math in there. It's a little bit too much for me
It's no problem for Claude Claude knows how to do that math and then and I use my expertise to string it together to get
good output. Yeah, awesome. You got time for one more quick question before we clap things up.
For sure. Raymond out there, Raymond Yees asks, it says, it'd be good to hear how Harvard uses
containers on AWS and its reliability. It's reliable, not the cheapest way to host things.
Are you thinking about moving that or is it not that much, you know, not that big of an expense?
about a failed experiment. We were using ECS and we're still using ECS. So that's AWS's main,
it's not Kubernetes, but it's one step down with their horizontal scaling container clusters.
And I wanted to move us onto a single EC2 instance because our projects are popular,
but they're not so popular that we actually have to worry about horizontal scaling.
Right. It's not like it's front page in New York Times. I guess it probably could be. But even so,
for the static sites, they probably still can take it.
Yeah. So I priced it out and I got an example deployed, an example project deployed,
and was able to confirm that it would indeed be much cheaper. And it was deployed in a similar way
using AWS CDK. So it's all infrastructure is code all the way down. But it turns out there's all
kinds of compliance when you are in charge of the VM at like a big university, or I'm sure any
any corporate setting, if you are in charge of the VM and the OS on it, then you have to know that you
have the latest patches in. You have to know that you have latest Ubuntu. And then there's other
things of different observability things that you have to have in place that you that are not usually
required if you're running in a container cluster like ecs i see so it ends up being a lot less
a lot less work and much easier to achieve compliance if we run containers or some other
serverless some other serverless thing if i run my all my personal projects they all run in a single
a single virtual machine but um sure we're running in containers yeah yeah and you've got all the
sock 2 stuff and all those different things right like there's layers yeah that's right awesome okay
yeah very cool final thoughts you want to talk to people who may be doing similar all right go ahead
you've got something more to add for you yeah i mean i'll mention that um but what i didn't say is
that in that 2019 when i started learning python i discovered talk python almost immediately and
one of the first episodes that i listened to was was the other digital humanities um the one with
cornelius van lit he was an awesome guest yeah that's right yeah and i thought i thought that
was great and that was also a bit about manuscripts a little bit more in the image side than the text
side and um i didn't understand everything that everybody was saying but i just i kept tuning
in. And I think because of that, because Talk Python was like this, you know, I've been remote
working for most of my time. And Talk Python has been kind of like that conversation with
the open source community that's been always in my ear. And I think that made, you know,
a difference making me feel like I understood the software landscape and like the developer
culture and what was going on. And then the different Python libraries and what was possible.
So to people who are interested in taking things in a more technical direction, I think it's helpful just to find a few things like that, that give you an insight into that world.
And the more you listen to it, the more you start to hear the same acronyms and the same things said enough that you start to feel like, okay, now you're part of the club.
I really appreciate that.
That's cool.
I've certainly had people reach out to me and say things that at first didn't make any sense to me.
Like, I've been listening for six weeks now, and it's starting to make sense what you're talking about.
Like, why have you been listening for six months when it made no sense?
That's insane.
But a lot of people use listening to the podcast, mine and others, as language immersion, right?
Like, I could get Duolingo, and I could learn Portuguese, or I could move to Brazil for a month.
You know what I mean?
Then I would really learn it.
Yeah, exactly.
Right.
Exactly. I think there's truth to that. Some of the things I did was search the word deployment
because I'm trying to get my head around how to deploy for the first time. I just want to hear
people talk about it. I could read about it. I could read the tutorial, but I just want to hear
people talk about deployment to get a sense of what actual deployment sounds like.
There's something really different when you're learning or trying, even you're maybe an experienced
programmer but not in this particular area to hear a human side of it not just the docs not a sterile
these are the four steps but like a human i love it i mean it's probably why i create the show
because like i didn't hear those stories we got to tell those stories awesome i appreciate that so
super cool all right so if other people are listening maybe one of your pieces of advice is
keep listening you'll get there yeah and and if anybody's in is like in the humanities and somehow
found their way onto this episode with no technical uh experience i just would would give the caution
of of like you know the anecdote that if um ai coding had been around the way it is now when i
was learning i wouldn't be doing digital humanities at harvard i wouldn't have been able to get into
this field, I wouldn't have known about it.
So I guess just think about that when you're learning and applying new tools.
I don't really know what the right fix for that is.
That's a very challenging problem.
I mean, you can say I'm just literally not going to fire it up.
But I mean, we used to hunt through Stack Overflow and the web and over and over.
And if you're really stuck or you really don't understand, like they're good at explaining
stuff to you.
really stay in a learner's mindset, not just press the easy button and make this thing and move on.
Easier said than done. Easier and said than done. So yeah, I just I want to leave this with kind of a
thought about how much things like Python and these, these tools and technology can really empower
stuff that you wouldn't think is even related,
like understanding old manuscripts
and how painting is connected or changed over time and stuff, right?
Those sound very much disjointed from tech and software,
but they really are superpowers that you can bring to your work,
whatever your industry is.
I know our field of study,
I know there's some sociologists out in the audience
and I'm sure others as well.
All right. Final thoughts, David, close it out.
That's it.
That's it. All right.
You said it great.
I mean, just applying these technical tools to old questions,
that is the core of digital humanities.
Awesome. Yeah.
When I first started hearing about this,
I thought I really don't know how this ties together.
and after seeing it a few times, I definitely see the power of it.
Thank you for your time coming on.
Thank you for sharing your look and the look inside of your team
and inside of a small piece of Harvard.
I really like these kinds of episodes
because it's hard to see this from the outside.
You just see the results,
but you don't see the inner workings of the team
and the motivation and stuff.
Thank you so much for being here.
Bye, everyone.
Yep.